# Comparison of DNA isolation protocols 
After quality filtering we obtained an average depth of xy reads (min xy, max xy, not counting in the negative control samples). OTUs represented with less than 10 reads were removed, followed by rarefying each sample to 50 000 reads with rrarefy (R ‘vegan’ package). Samples with less than 50 000 reads were removed from further analysis (n= xy). Rarefied data was used for analysis and graphic representation of alpha diversity (Chao1 richness estimate), beta diversity (NMDS) and overlap of shared OTUs among DNA isolation protocols in R (version 4.2.0) using packages: ‘tidyverse’ ‘ggpubr’, ‘stringr’, ‘RVAideMemoire’, ‘vegan’, ‘phyloseq’, ‘reshape2’, ‘splitstackshape’, ggVennDiagram, ‘metagMisc’, ‘MicrobiotaProcess’, ‘labdsv’. Pairwise comparisons using paired t-tests in ‘base’ R were conducted to compare the DNA concentrations and richness estimate (Chao1) between the samples of one species subjected to different DNA isolation methods. Permutational analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) was performed using ‘vegan’ package to test the differences in microbial composition between aliquots of the same sample isolated using different DNA isolation protocols. Pairwise PERMANOVA using ‘RVAideMemoire’ R package was used to test the differences in microbial composition between individual samples. The analysis was based on Bray-Curtis dissimilarity matrix. To obtain the number of significantly different ZOTUs isolated with different kits we did an indicator value analysis for each species with package ‘labdsv’. R script for reproducible research is available at: https://github.com/tanjazlender/DNA-isolation-protocol-comparison. 
